Understanding transactions and concurrency in databases and SQL is crucial for ensuring data consistency and reliability when multiple users or systems interact with the database. Here's a detailed yet simplified explanation:

What is a Transaction?
A transaction in a database is a single unit of work that performs a sequence of operations. These operations (like inserting, updating, or deleting records) should either be completed fully or not executed at all. Think of it as an "all-or-nothing" approach.

Example
Imagine transferring money from Account A to Account B:

Deduct $100 from Account A.
Add $100 to Account B.
If one of these steps fails (e.g., the database crashes), you don’t want only one operation to succeed. The entire process must either succeed or roll back to its original state.

ACID Properties
Transactions are governed by ACID properties to ensure reliability:

Atomicity:

A transaction is "all or nothing." If any part of the transaction fails, the database returns to its previous state.
Example: If a payment fails midway, the money should not be deducted.
Consistency:

Ensures the database moves from one valid state to another. All rules, constraints, and relationships remain intact.
Example: After a transfer, the total balance in all accounts must remain consistent.
Isolation:

Transactions are executed as if they were independent of others. Changes made in one transaction don’t affect another until completed.
Example: While one person is updating an account, another can’t access partial changes.
Durability:

Once a transaction is committed, changes are permanent, even in the event of a crash.
Example: Your bank deposit remains safe after a system restart.
Concurrency in Databases
Concurrency refers to multiple users or applications accessing or modifying the database simultaneously. Managing concurrency ensures that multiple operations do not interfere with each other.

Why Concurrency Matters
Modern systems support hundreds or thousands of simultaneous users.
Without proper concurrency control, operations can lead to data inconsistencies, such as:
Dirty Reads: Reading uncommitted changes from another transaction.
Lost Updates: When two transactions overwrite each other's updates.
Non-repeatable Reads: Getting different data on repeated reads during the same transaction.
Concurrency Control Mechanisms
Locks:
Prevents multiple transactions from accessing the same data simultaneously.

Shared Lock: Allows reading but no writing.
Exclusive Lock: Prevents both reading and writing by others.
Isolation Levels:
Determines how isolated a transaction is from others. Common levels include:

Read Uncommitted: Allows dirty reads; least strict.
Read Committed: Avoids dirty reads but allows non-repeatable reads.
Repeatable Read: Prevents dirty and non-repeatable reads, but phantom reads may occur.
Serializable: Fully isolates transactions; most strict and safe.
Optimistic Concurrency:
Assumes minimal conflict. Transactions check data integrity only when committing changes.

Pessimistic Concurrency:
Assumes high conflict. Transactions lock data early to avoid conflicts.

SQL Commands for Transactions

Begin Transaction:

BEGIN TRANSACTION;
Starts a new transaction.

Commit:

COMMIT;
Saves all changes made during the transaction permanently.

Rollback:

ROLLBACK;
Reverts changes to the state before the transaction started.

Savepoint:

SAVEPOINT savepoint_name;
Sets a checkpoint to roll back to a specific point within a transaction.

Concurrency Example
Scenario:
Two users attempt to book the last ticket for a concert simultaneously.

Without Concurrency Control:

Both users might see the last ticket as available.
Both transactions proceed to deduct the ticket, resulting in an oversold situation.
With Concurrency Control:

Locks ensure only one transaction accesses the ticket at a time.
The second transaction must wait or receive a message that the ticket is unavailable.

Summary
Transactions ensure data integrity through the ACID principles.
Concurrency manages simultaneous database access to avoid conflicts and inconsistencies.
Tools like locks, isolation levels, and SQL commands (COMMIT, ROLLBACK) help manage transactions and concurrency effectively.
Understanding and applying these concepts ensures reliable and consistent database operations, even in high-traffic systems.